---
layout: book_post
title: 2018 Reading
---

# 2018 Reading

## A People's History of the United States by *Howard Zinn*

More than any other book I've read so far, "A People's History of the United
States" made me aware of my ignorance. Even knowing the author's biases (he
states them clearly within and after the book; a first for me and one I
appreciate) I felt the book was able to portray historical events in a fair
manner and allowed for the reader to judge for themselves what this meant for
the past, present, and future of this nation. I also could not help but draw
many similarities between past behavior and the actions among our politicians
and people these past 18 months (some strain of frequency bias, likely). In a
sense, it saddened me to see history on repeat; in another, it made me hopeful
that with this knowledge and perspective, we can all make significant efforts
to improve.

I will be expanding my book list to include a number of authors referenced in
this book.

## Accelerate: Building and Scaling High-Performing Technology Organizations by *Nicole Forsgren*

Forsgen, Humble, and Kim present their findings from data collected and analyzed
over (to date) 4 years that illustrate the characteristics and behaviors of
teams and organizations that deliver software. Not only do they demonstrate the
minimum set of attributes that make for high-performing teams, they explain the
science and rigorous process they used to reach their conclusions. Their
descriptions matched my experiences (from low- to high-performing teams) but
what struck me most was the time they spend backing up their conclusions with
the data and definition of the process. I learned a lot about structuring
surveys and how they're evaluated to determine the integrity of the data and
how they can be used to gain confidence in hypotheses.

## All Systems Red (The Murderbot Diaries, #1) by *Martha Wells*

A good, fast, enjoyable read about a half bot/half organic being trying to
understand itself while keeping its human clients alive, I know I'll be looking
for more Martha Wells stories!

## Amulet Series

I managed to catch up to the kids this year by filling in the holes I had for
this series. I'm grateful the school library carries all these titles.

* The Stonekeeper (Amulet, #1) by *Kazu Kibuishi*
* The Stonekeeper's Curse (Amulet, #2) by *Kazu Kibuishi*
* Prince of the Elves (Amulet, #5) by *Kazu Kibuishi*
* Escape from Lucien (Amulet, #6) by *Kazu Kibuishi*
* Firelight (Amulet, #7) by *Kazu Kibuishi*
* Supernova (Amulet, #8) by *Kazu Kibuishi*

## Binti (Binti, #1) by *Nnedi Okorafor*

There is so much to enjoy in this story. Despite its brevity it's packed with
lots of amazing imagery and emotion that my imagination had run so wild I could
not believe I'd come to the end of the book! I'm looking forward to picking up
the next books in the series.

## Bloomberg by Bloomberg by *Michael R. Bloomberg*

Standard issue for new hires at Bloomberg, I picked at this book from time to
time. The historical parts of the book were interesting but I found a lot of
repetition in the book that made it longer than it needed to be. 

## Brotopia: Breaking Up the Boys' Club of Silicon Valley by *Emily  Chang*

This was an excellent read for me. Chang does a great job of illustrating the
thinking, ideology, trends, and cultural norms that have developed and persisted
within the tech industry over the past 50 years, specifically those that favor
white, heterosexual men and diminish everyone else. Most telling are the stories
she consolidates and relays from current events. This book is a must-read for
anyone that looks like me.

## Gravity Falls: Lost Legends: 4 All-New Adventures! by *Alex Hirsch*

The kids love Gravity Falls. I got hooked after watching one episode with them
(Mabel is my favorite character). I love sharing these stories with my little
ones.

## Leonardo da Vinci by *Walter Isaacson*

It is uncontested that da Vinci was a polymath, eternally curious, fastidious in
his study of nature, and a pioneer in many fields including painting and
engineering. Popular culture has bestowed a mythic quality to the man but his
motivations and sources of inspiration were much more pedestrian than some tall
tales would have us believe. Isaacson’s book helps clarify for us the origins
and influences that shaped Leonardo’s work. In doing so, he makes the subject
extremely approachable. For example, Leo drew up various military apparatus such
as a tank prototype; these were derived partly from previous work of the
ancients (Greek and Roman texts) and partly from da Vinci’s fantasy. Further,
the flying machines he drafted were applications of his study of birds and their
flight to concoct stage pieces for his theatrical commissions. Knowing these
things makes them no less wonderful; indeed it makes Leonardo an inspiration for
for all of us. Certainly he had some innate abilities such as his attention to
detail, a keen eye, a desire to document much of his ideas and learning.
This treatment of da Vinci shows us that we can each use our talents to
pursue our interests, sometimes fail at them, and persevere to create
beautiful things.

## Linux Kernel Development by *Robert   Love*

A bit dated by now but this book still provides lots of useful context about
Linux kernel internals.

## Making Work Visible: Exposing Time Theft to Optimize Work & flow by *Dominica Degrandis*

Degrandis does a great job defining and putting a face on a set of "time
thieves" that prevent us from getting work done. The central theme is
visibility. The more we make visible, the better we can understand what is
stealing our time and make adjustments. Further, we can effectively communicate
within and without our teams about the things that impact our work. This leads
to setting better expectations and greater satisfaction, overall. And while the
book recommends a Kanban approach to managing work, it's not necessary to
embrace that framework to realize the successes from visualizing work; Degrandis
even makes this point a few times in the text.<br/><br/>Degrandis' writing
matched my experience at various jobs where, over many, many years, I learned
some of these lessons. I wish I'd had her book so many years ago. I'm glad I
read it even now as it helped clarify the things that can contribute to lost
productivity and happiness.

## Norse Mythology by *Neil Gaiman*

I enjoyed this thoroughly.

## Origin (Robert Langdon, #5) by *Dan Brown*

Dan Brown followed his usual formula of an intriguing mystery coupled with a
fast-paced, developing grand conspiracy to keep some great truth a secret.
Langdon is thrust into action and has as his side-kick, an alluring, competent
partner that matches his intellect.  To be honest, I am here for it. After
reading many books this year that require reflection and deeper thinking, Origin
was just the sort of break I was looking for. I knew what I was getting and I
enjoyed every sentence of it. The story also got me interesting in a few
additional topics, like most good books do.

## Our Magnificent Bastard Tongue: The Untold History of English by *John H. McWhorter*

I felt like I took a journey around Europe while reading this book. The author
develops a theory of the history of English that includes influences from the
Celtic, Welsh, Vikings, French, Germanic, and (possibly) Phoenicians.

## Proof of Collusion: How Trump Betrayed America by *Seth Abramson*

Having followed Abramson's Twitter feed for some time, the content of his book
was not new to me. What I found most useful about this book is that he has
carefully curated content from publicly available sources to back his theory of
the case that Trump and numerous folks in his orbit have been knowing parties to
collusive and obstructive activities for years prior to and through Trump's
presidency. It is a harrowing story based only on current reporting; I can only
imagine what Mueller's investigation has in its trove.

## Provenance by *Ann Leckie*

As I neared the end of this book, I thought, "Surely, this will continue. It's
not over." But it was, and I wanted more. There were so many intertwining
backgrounds and stories that I got caught up trying to figure out which paths
would intersect and which would diverge. There was a conspicuous abbreviation
of pronouns that, at first, felt awkward, but after a few pages became
completely natural. It made the characters feel richer because they could not be
too easily defined by simple gender classification. I'll be looking for
more titles by Leckie.

## Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking by *Susan Cain*

If you're an introvert or know one, go read this book.


## Radical Focus: Achieving Your Most Important Goals with Objectives and Key Results by *Christina Wodtke*

To my mind, OKRs are the latest incarnation of clear planning. They are very
much synonymous with goals and milestones in that they define a desired outcome
and statements that should help measure progress toward those outcomes. In other
words, there's nothing new under the sun. However, the parable of the startup
struggling to focus their collective efforts is a nice way to introduce an
otherwise dry topic; very few folks get excited about planning. And to that
point, what makes goal setting and planning difficult is the follow-through and
constant adjustments required when trying to reach an outcome. The book points
this out a few times but I suspect folks are likely to miss this in their
attempts to cargo cult the idea in their organizations. Still, like most tried
and true ideas, it's useful to repeat them; they will eventually be taken up and
executed successfully by those that care enough to do the hard work.

## Seeing What Others Don't: The Remarkable Ways We Gain Insights by *Gary Klein*

Klein performs naturalistic research into the ways insights are formed and
discovers three paths that lead to them: connections, contradictions, and
creative desperation. His research is driven by a set of stories he selected
across many decades, events, people, and experiences. The work was contrasted
with lab experiments used to understand insights, especially to highlight the
idea that those trials typically limit our understanding to a narrow set of ways
insight is gained.<br/><br/>This book gave me some interesting ideas to consider
and I'm looking forward to reading more of Klein's work.

## The Etto Principle: Efficiency-Thoroughness Trade-Off: Why Things That Go Right Sometimes Go Wrong by *Erik Hollnagel*

Someone once said that after reading this book they couldn't help but see ETTO
everywhere. I agree. Every action we take (or don't) requires a decision that
balances several variables, especially constraints such as time, knowledge, and
competing priorities. It's both necessary and good (generally) for us to make
trade-offs between being efficient and thorough (with a strong tendency to the
former). In terms of safety and resilience engineering, understanding ETTO helps
us to understand factors that contribute to negative incidents. Crucially in
this book, however, Hollnagel makes and reiterates a point that it's not enough
to focus on when things go wrong; we must also spend time understanding how
(most often) things go right. But, thanks to ETTO'ing, we tend to only report on
negative events. If we can make time to understand the normal operations (and
performance expectations) of our (socio-technical) systems, we can better
understand (appreciate) what contributes to their failures.<br/><br/>This book
is a pragmatic read and filled many useful references for the reader to learn
more. I will be picking up a copy of Perrow's "Normal Accident Theory" thanks to
those references.

## The Family ADHD Solution by *Mark Bertin*

ADHD can be a challenge for everyone in the family. This book contains a number
of pointers, reminders, and ideas on how to better meet those challenges in a
mindful and meditative way.

## The Fifth Season (The Broken Earth, #1) by *N.K. Jemisin*

It took me a minute before I realized the story wasn't alternating between
characters in different times but the same folks. When I did, the book, which
had already grabbed my interest, really took off. The cast is developed in a way
that makes them feel so real and the story drops just enough hints to keep you
guessing about lots of things. I'm definitely going to finish the set.

## The Legend of Rock Paper Scissors by *Drew Daywalt*

Awesome! One of the best histories of this venerable game.

## The Square and the Tower: Networks and Power, from the Freemasons to Facebook by *Niall Ferguson*

The main point of this book is that throughout history networks and hierarchy
have always lived side-by-side, at times working against each other, at others
coalescing to bring about new orders. I appreciated learning new (to me) history
but occasionally the content had hard transitions. I realize that a more
thorough treatment of the history would make for a much larger tome, but
sometimes the reading was a bit tedious. Still, I came away thinking more about
the design and operation of networks, especially in the context of historical
events, leading me to want to know more.

## The Undoing Project: A Friendship That Changed Our Minds by *Michael   Lewis*

Having read 'Thinking Fast and Slow', this book caught my eye. I had hoped that
I'd learn some new things, but beyond a history of Kahneman and Tversky, I
gained no new insights. If you haven't read 'Thinking Fast and Slow' (an
approachable text for layfolks), 'The Undoing Project' makes for a good
appetizer that will whet your appetite for more.

## The Silent Corner (Jane Hawk, #1) by *Dean Koontz*

After reading 700 pages of U.S. history, this book was a great break and a fun
read. The action is fast and even though it's got a familiar theme (mind
control/Manchurian candidate) I was entertained. I'll likely read the rest of
the trilogy to see how things progress.

## The Whispering Room (Jane Hawk, #2) by *Dean Koontz*

This is a fun follow-up to Koontz's "Silent Corner". I'm hooked On Jane Hawk and
pulling for her as she chases down the bad guys, helps unwitting strangers, and
seeks to unravel a nasty cabal.

## The Crooked Staircase (Jane Hawk, #3) by *Dean Koontz*

I enjoyed this book, especially as a diversion after reading non-fiction. Part
of me is a little bummed that this series will span (I think) 7 titles (the
first 2 books had lots of action and I was looking forward to some closure), but
I'm definitely invested. This chapter in the series set up some new characters
and closed out others. It leaves me thinking #4 will get back to some of the
same thrills as the first 2.

## Vampirina at the Beach by *Anne Marie Pace*

Surf's up Vampirina! This book is coooool!

