---
layout: post
title: Note-taking
tags:
type: post
status: publish
published: true
---

I take notes daily. Copious notes. All the notes.

## Why?

The obvious answer is "So I don't forget." I began taking notes in earnest after
my first annual job review, where neither I, nor my manager, could recall all
the important work I had done. I felt like I had missed an opportunity to show
off my accomplishments and I never wanted that to happen again.

Really, though, I take notes so that I don't _have_ to remember.

At any point in time, I likely have several thoughts or ideas bouncing around in
my head. I can compartmentalize really well, which _feels_ like I am managing
those ideas effectively, but in reality, I'm only deferring those thoughts for
some random time. Those times when I'm nowhere near an instrument to capture
them (like the shower, washing dishes, etc.). If I can capture them when they're
(relatively) fresh, I can purge them from my mind, coming back to them later.

In short, taking notes helps me focus.

It's an implicit focus, most times, because I have fewer things on my mind. But
that tends to lead to supporting explicit focus later.

## How?

When I realized that I take notes to conserve mental energy, the "how" took on a
new shape for me. And my tool choice changed as I refined my needs.

I started with Notepad. No organization, no linking. Just raw notes shoved into
a virtual "crazy" drawer on my `C:` drive.

I used Evernote for years, primarily because I could sync notes across all my
devices. If I were in the middle of scrubbing pots and an idea flashed, I could
hastily dry my hands and tap it out on my phone. Search helped me locate past
notes, but the quality of the results was variable, depending on the quality of
my notes. Sometimes, I didn't quite know what I wanted to write down, so a
placeholder would be useful. Sadly, Evernote didn't have a mechanism like wiki
linking that allowed for future notes, but I trudged on.

For a few years, I used Roam Research. Part of my note-taking includes daily
TODOs to help me organize myself and Roam defaults to a TODO-driven model. That
seemed like a good fit. I especially liked that I could create wiki-style links
to future notes and hop to them later. For a long time, they had no mobile
option, and I missed that, but I grew accustomed to it. In a way, _not_ having a
mobile app felt liberating, given how terminally online we all seem to be. When
they did release a mobile app, I used it, but found it less compelling than my
Evernote days. Despite tagging support, something about Roam Research felt
lacking, in terms of how notes could be organized. Yes, it behaves like a graph,
but that felt a bit too flat for my needs.

Enter Obsidian. I was aware of Obsidian when I chose to use Roam Research, but I
wasn't interested in self-hosting my notes (I don't think they had a sync
offering at the time). As my dissatisfaction with Roam grew, I took another
look. I've always been a fan of truly text-based documentation (like Markdown
and Graphviz) because it is durable; it's legible in its raw form and endlessly
style-able. I really like that in addition to creating any folder structure I
want, links between notes neither require nor depend on that structure. **And**
I can easily create future notes via wiki link-style syntax. I've been thinking
a lot about privacy lately so I've opted not to purchase Obsidian Sync, choosing
instead to host my notes in Github (which I already pay for to host code). I
have to manually sync from time to time, but since I'm using `git` every day,
doing so feels like a natural extension of my current workflow. I also have
been using the Templater plugin to build some light, custom workflows. In total,
I am very satisfied.

## The Next Tool

I can't explain it, and I know I'm not alone in this, but I always feel
complelled to check out new note-taking tools. I don't know what they might look
like, but I'm certain when they arrive, I'll dabble.
